.\" Rscriptall(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for rlang.
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): every section of the reference in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/Rscriptall.1
.\" Install:      cp man/Rscriptall.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH RSCRIPTALL 1 "2026-07-23" "rlang 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
Rscriptall \- the rlang comprehensive reference (invocation, language, architecture,
bytecode VM + Cranelift JIT, LSP, DAP, inline-Rust FFI)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all\-in\-one
.B rlang
manual, modeled on
.BR zshall (1).
It concatenates the major sections of the rlang reference into a single page so
you can grep with `/`:
.RS 2
.PP
.B 1.  INVOCATION
.RB "\(em " "flags, files, exit status"
.br
.B 2.  LANGUAGE
.RB "\(em " "the R the runtime parses and runs"
.br
.B 3.  ARCHITECTURE
.RB "\(em " "lex \[->] parse \[->] lower \[->] fusevm VM + JIT"
.br
.B 4.  TOOLING
.RB "\(em " "\-\-lsp, \-\-dap, inline-Rust FFI, AOT, wasm"
.br
.B 5.  DIAGNOSTICS
.RB "\(em " "error format and common messages"
.RE
.SH 1. INVOCATION
.B Rscript
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR runs an R script.
.B \-e "\fISRC\fR" / \-\-eval
executes a one\-liner instead of a file, and
.B \-\-repl
starts the interactive REPL on a persistent host.
.B \-\-lsp
and
.B \-\-dap
speak their protocols over stdio and take no file.
.B \-\-build \fIFILE\fR
ahead\-of\-time compiles the script's bytecode into the on\-disk cache.
See
.BR Rscript (1)
for the per\-flag table.
.SH 2. LANGUAGE
rlang implements R on the vector value model \(em there are no scalars; every value
is a vector with attributes.
.SS Values and attributes
Atomic vectors of
.BR logical ", " integer ", " double ", " complex ", and " character ,
plus generic
.BR list ,
each carrying
.B NA
for every type. Attributes
.RB ( names ", " dim ", " class ", \[u2026])"
ride with the value; recycling extends the shorter operand, and
.B NA
propagates through arithmetic and R's three\-valued logic.
.SS Indexing and assignment
All four index forms
.RB ( "x[i]" ", positive/negative/logical/character subscripts)"
plus
.BR "[[" ", " $ ", and matrix " "m[i, j]" .
Assignment is copy\-on\-modify, including nested targets and replacement functions
.RB ( "names(x) <- v" ", " "x[i] <- v" ).
.SS Functions and dispatch
Closures with default arguments,
.BR "..." ,
and R's argument matching; lexical scope with the superassignment operator
.BR "<<-" ;
S3 method dispatch through
.BR UseMethod .
The full
.B ?Syntax
operator ladder is supported, including user\-defined
.B %op%
infix operators and the native pipe. 131 primitives are implemented, with R's
printing rules for each type.
.SH 3. ARCHITECTURE
.EX
R source \[->] lexer \[->] parser (AST) \[->] lower to fusevm bytecode \[->] fusevm VM + Cranelift JIT
.EE
.PP
rlang carries no local
.I vm.rs
or
.IR jit.rs .
for/while/repeat/if and
.BR && / ||
lower to native fusevm jumps with native integer loop counters, so the tracing
JIT sees ordinary loops; R's vector, attribute, and S3 semantics are served by an
.B RHost
vector heap reached through fusevm's extension handler. The same fusevm engine
hosts zshrs, stryke, awkrs, elisp, and ruby, so JIT and VM improvements benefit all
of them at once. Behaviour is checked byte\-for\-byte against reference
.B Rscript
by a 48\-snippet differential parity corpus plus 8 runnable examples, both identical
to GNU R 4.6.1.
.SH 4. TOOLING
.SS Language server (\-\-lsp)
.B Rscript \-\-lsp
speaks LSP over stdio: completion and hover from the symbol corpus (the same table
that generates
.IR docs/reference.html ),
and diagnostics from the runtime's own parser. It is read\-only; no output reaches
the terminal.
.SS Debugger (\-\-dap)
.B Rscript \-\-dap
speaks the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio: line breakpoints, single\-stepping,
a stack trace, and inspection of a frame's locals. Program output is captured and
forwarded as
.B output
events so it never corrupts the protocol channel.
.SS Inline-Rust FFI (.rust / .Call)
R has no
.B "rust { }"
block syntax, so rlang surfaces fusevm's inline\-Rust FFI through two R\-idiomatic
builtins.
.B .rust(\fIcode\fR)
compiles a self\-contained Rust block \(em its
.B pub extern "C"
exports \(em to a
.B cdylib
on first use, caches it under
.IR ~/.cache/fusevm/ffi ,
and
.BR dlopen s
it.
.B .Call(\fIname\fR, \fI...\fR)
\(em R's own native\-call verb \(em invokes a registered export, marshalling
length\-1 R vectors to fusevm scalars and the scalar result back to a length\-1 R
vector. Both need
.B rustc
on
.B PATH
plus
.BR dlopen ,
so they run only on native targets.
.SS Deployment
.B \-\-build
ahead\-of\-time compiles to the on\-disk bytecode cache for a native
.B .fvm
run, and the same crate builds for
.B wasm32
to run R in a web worker.
.SH 5. DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are written to standard error in R's own message form, for example a parse
error, an object\-not\-found error, or a subscript\-out\-of\-bounds condition. The
process exits non\-zero on an unhandled error and 0 on success.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR Rscript (1)
The focused invocation page. Source and issue tracker:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/rlang
.SH AUTHOR
Part of the fusevm language family.
